5.1 effective figure design (#65)
UBC-MDS/exploratory-data-viz: chapters/en/slides/module5/module5_01.Rmd

# Remember to also manually update the YAML title above
```

type: slides

# Effective figures for communication

Notes:
So far we have learned how to understand Altair's visualization grammar,
how to create several different types of plots,
and how to use these when exploring data on our own.

In this module we will learn the principles of effective figure design for communication
and see how we can implement these using Altair.

---

## Figure design allows us to tell different stories from the same data

<center><img src="/module5/iraqs-bloody-toll.png" width="35%"></img></center>

http://www.simonscarr.com/iraqs-bloody-toll

Notes:
When designing figures for presentation,
we have the possibility to tell different stories 
from the same underlying data.

On this slide,
you can see an award winning figure describing the "bloody toll" from the American war in Iraq.
This figure has been purposely designed to draw your attention to the blood-like red color
and the downward facing bars which brings up association with dripping blood.

The title also clearly highlights the negative aspects of this data.

Now let's look at another figure of the same data.

> ---

Reviewer: The introduction to this module is great 🙌 !

and the color represents whether the are marching against Moscow (gold/brown)
or retreating back to France (black).
The bottom of the chart shows how the temperature changed during the campaign.

It does take a few seconds to digest the graph when you first see it,
but once you have familiarized yourself with it,
you appreciate how you can see in detail the army progress as it moved through Europe.

This is a great visualization when the reader has time to sit down with the plot for a while
and when you believe your target audience will appreciate this level of detail?

But what if you are presenting this as part of a slide deck in a board meeting
and only can spend a few seconds describing the plot?
It would likely be too complicated to digest and the take home message might be lost.

---

## Figure design should be adopted to the target audience and situation

<center><img src="/module5/napoleon-pie.png" width="50%"></img></center>

https://socviz.co/lookatdata.html#lookatdata

Notes:
In the board meeting,
this pie chart is likely more effective in communicating the take home message:
the Napolean army was decimated as a result of this military campaign.

> This infomation is simple enough that a pie is effective,
> but in general we should be careful when using pie charts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although we said earlier in this course that we should generally avoid using pie charts,
however here the information is simple enough that a pie chart is very effective.
```

---

## Including many categories in pie charts makes them hard to interpret

<center><img src="/module5/pie-bar-categories.png" width="70%"></img></center>

https://github.com/glosophy/CatoDataVizGuidelines/blob/master/PocketStyleBook.pdf

Notes:
When there are too many categories in a pie chart,
it becomes difficult to compare them with each other.
Both because the colors can be hard to distinguish
and because the angle and area of the pie slices is not 

In most cases,
it is more effective to use position
as the visual channel to convey a comparison
instead area and angle.

A bar chart is often a superior alternative to a pie chart,
and when in doubt chose the bar chart for counts, percentages, and proportions.

```python

> ```

Reviewer: This slide is a bit odd following the higher-level theme of the preview 5... I think we also already talked about this in an earlier module in detail when we discussed choosing a visual channel. To me this slide deck should be more about audience and polish. Maybe here you could give some examples (at a high level) of the different effective figure design things you are going to dig into in the next few slide decks? Some more time could also be devoted to choosing the level of detail for the audience (and medium!)
